# Title
Age-associated inflammation perturbates the homeostasis of basement membrane zone through rewiring AP-1 mediated gene regulatory network in epidermal stem cells

# Abstract
The age-associated functional decline of skin tissue attributes the dysfunction of epidermal stem cells (EpiSCs) and their surrounding microenvironment including basement membrane (BM). Here, we explored the changes of BM in the aged skin compared with the young skin through integrative analysis of transcriptomic and proteomic datasets. An elevated expression of BM genes in both RNA and protein expression level in the aged skin. Then, scRNA-seq analyses showed that EpiSCs play an important role in maintaining the integrity of BM via fine-tuning the expression of BM genes. Further transcriptional regulatory network analysis showed that the core members of AP-1 regulate the expression of BM genes including FOS, FOSB, ATF3 and NFKB1 et al. Interestingly, we found that the expression of BM genes is activated with repeatedly inflammatory stimulus via FOS binding in the BM gene promoters in EpiSCs, which is similar with the long-term inflammatory process of skin aging. Additionally, the rescue experiment of AP-1 inhibitor showed the remission of skin inflammation and a repression of BM gene expression in EpiSCs. Our study showed that the age-associated inflammation stimulus promotes the expression of BM genes through enhance the Fos binding in EpiSCs and lead to stiffness and thickness of BM, eventually cause the niche aberration and function decline in the aged skin. Our analysis call for attention on the critical functional role of BM in maintaining the homeostasis of skin tissue.
